The Daily Province - Saturday, April 16, 1910

The True Legend of Vancouver's Lions

You can see them as you look towards the north and the west where the dream hills swim into the sky amid their ever drifting clouds of pearl and grey. They catch the earliest hint of sunrise, they hold the last colour of sunset. Twin mountains they are, lifting their twin peaks above the fairest city in all Canada, and known throughout the British Empire as "the lions of Vancouver."

Some times the smoke of forest fires blue them until they gleam like opals in a purple atmosphere too beautiful for words to paint, sometimes the slanting rains festoon scarfs of mist about their crest, and the peaks fade into shadowy outlines, melting, melting, forever melting into the distance.

But for most days in the year the sun circles the twin glories with a sweep of gold, the moon washes them with a torrent of silver. Oftentimes when the city is shrouded in rain, the sun yellows their snows to a deep orange, but through the sun and shadow they stand immovable, smiling westward above the waters of the superb beauty of the Capilano Canyon. But the Indian tribes do not know these peaks as "the Lions." Even the chief, whose feet so recently wandered to "the happy hunting grounds," never heard the name given them until I mentioned it to him one dreamy August day, as together we followed the train leading to the canyon. He seemed so surprised at the name, that I mentioned the reason it had been applied to them, asking him if he remembered the Landseer Lions in Trafalgar square. Yes, he remembered those splendid statues, and his quick eye saw the resemblance instantly. It appeared to please him and his fine face expressed the haunting memories of the far-away roar of old London. But the "call of the blood" was strongest and presently he referred to the Indian legend of those peaks, a legend I have reason to believe is absolutely unknown to the thousands of palefaces, who look upon the lions daily without the love for them that is in the Indian heart, without knowledge of the secret of the two sisters.

The legend was far more fascinating as it left his lips in the quaint broken English that is never so dulcet as when it slips from an Indian tongue. His inimitable gestures, strong, graceful, comprehensive were like a perfectly chosen frame embracing a delicate painting, and his brooding eyes were as the light in which the picture hung. So - "Thousands, many thousands of years ago, there were no twin peaks like sentinels guarding the outposts of this sunset coast. They were placed there long after the first creation, when the Segalie Tyee moulded the mountains, and patterned the mighty rivers where the salmon run because of His love for His Indian children, and His wisdom of their necessities. In those times there were many and mighty tribes of the Indians along the Pacific - in the mountain ranges, at the shores and sources of the great Fraser river, Indian law ruled the land, Indian customs prevailed, Indian beliefs were regarded. Those were the legend-making ages, when great things occurred to make the traditions we make to our children today. Perhaps the greatest of these traditions is the story of the twin sisters, for they are known to us as "the Chief's daughters," and to them we owe the great peace in which we live, and have lived for many countless moons. There is an ancient custom amongst the coast tribes that when our daughters step from childhood into the great world of womanhood, that the occasion must be made one of extreme rejoicing. The being who possesses the possibility of some day mothering a man-child, a warrior, a brave, receives much consideration in most nations, but to us - the Sunset tribes, she is honoured above air people. The parents usually give a great potlatch, and a feast that lasts many days. The entire tribe and the surrounding tribes are bidden to this festival, more than that. sometimes when a great tyee celebrates for his daughter, the tribes from far up the coast, from the distant north, from inland, from the island, from the Cariboo country, are gathered as guests to the feast. During these days of rejoicing, the girl is placed in a high seat, an exalted position, for is she not marriageable? And does not marriage mean motherhood? And does not motherhood mean a vaster nation of brave sons and of gentle daughters, who in their turn will give us sons and daughters of their own?

But it was many thousands of years ago that a great tyee had two daughters, who grew to womanhood at the same springtime, when the first great run of salmon thronged the rivers and the ollallie bushes were heavy with blossoms. These two daughters were young, livable, and oh! very beautiful. Their father the great tyee prepared to make a feast such as the coast had never seen. There were to be days and days of rejoicing. The people were to come for many leagues, were to bring gifts to the girls and to receive gifts of great value from the chief and hospitality was to reign as long as pleasuring feet could dance, and enjoying lips could laugh, and mouths partake of the excellence of the chef's fish, game, and ollallies.

The only shadow on the joy of it all was war, for the tribe of the great tyre was at war with the upper coast Indians, those who lived north, near what is named by the palefaces the port of Prince Rupert. Giant war canoes slipped along the entire coast. war songs broke the silence of the nights. Hatred, vengeance, strife, horror, festered everywhere like sores on the surface of the earth.

But the great tyre after warring for weeks, turned and laughed at the battle and the bloodshed, for he had been victor in every encounter. and he could well afford to leave the strife for a brief week and feast in his daughters' honour, nor permit any mere enemy to come between him and the traditions of his race and his household. So he turned insultingly deaf ears to their war cries, he ignored with arrogant indifference their paddle dips that encroached within his own coast waters, and he prepared, as a great tyre should, to royally entertain his tribes in honour of his daughters.

But seven suns before the great feast these two maidens came before him and clasped his hand.
"Oh! Our father," they said, "may we speak?"
"Speak, my daughters, my girls with the eyes of April, the hearts of June." (The early spring and early summer would be the more accurate Indian phrasing).
"Some day, oh, our father, we may mother a man child, who may grow to be just such a powerful tyre as you are, and for this honour that may some day be ours, we have come to crave a favor of you, oh, our father."
"It is your privilege at this celebration to receive any favor your hearts may wish," he replied, placing his palms beneath their girlish chins. "The favor is yours before you ask it, my daughters."

"Will you, for our sake, invite the great northern hostile tribe you war upon to this, our feast" they asked fearlessly.
"To a peaceful feast, a feast in the honour of women?" he exclaimed incredulously.
"So we would desire it," they answered.
"And so it shall be," he declared. "I can deny you nothing this day, and some day you may rear sons to bless this peace you have asked, and to bless their mothers' sire for granting it."

Then he turned to all the young men of the tribe and commanded: "Build fires at sunset on all the coast headlands, fires of welcome; man your canoes and face the north. greet the enemy and tell them that I, the Tyee of the Capilanos, ask, no command, that they join me for a great feast in honor of my two daughters."

And when the northern tribes got this invitation, they flocked down the coast to this feast of a great peace. They brought their woman and their children; they brought game and fish, gold and white stone beads, baskets and carven ladles, and wonderful woven blankets to lay at the feet of their now acknowledged tyee.

And he in turn gave such a potlatch that nothing but traditions can vie with it. There were long glad days of joyousness, long pleasureable nights of dancing and camp fires, and vast quantities of food. The war canoes were emptied of their deadly weapons, and filled with the daily catch of salmon. The hostile war songs ceased and in their place was heard the soft shuffle of dancing feet, the singing voices of women, the play-games of the children of the two powerful tribes which had been until now ancient enemies, for a great and lasting brotherhood was sealed between them. Their war songs were ended for ever.

Then the Sagalie Tyee smiled on his Indian children. "I will make these young-eyed maidens immortal," he said. In the cup of his hands he lifted the chief's daughters and set them for ever in a high place, for they had born two offspring, Peace and Brotherhood, each of which is now a great tyee, ruling this land.

And on the mountain the chief's two daughters can be seen wrapped in the suns, the snows, the stars of all seasons, for they have stood in this high place for thousands of years, and will stand for thousands of years to come, guarding the peace of the Pacific coast and the quiet of the Capilano Canyon."

This is the Indian legend of the "Lions of Vancouver," as I heard it from one who will tell me no more the traditions of his people.

E. Pauline Johnson - Tekahionwake.
